# Section 5: Hyper-divergent haplotypes are widespread in the H. bakeri genome

[**asp_region**](https://github.com/lstevens17/heligmosomoides_MS/tree/main/5_divergent_contents/asp_region)

Contains code and files associated with the Ancylostoma secreted protein-containing region shown in Figure 4. The nucmer alignments of each assembled haplotype to the nxHelBake1.1 reference genome (`*filtered.coords`) are plotted by the Rscript `plot_dotplots_nxHelBake.R`. The gene coordinates of haplotype are in `*coordinates.tsv` and plotted by `plot_gene_locations.R`. The FASTA files, alignments, and gene trees of two ASP homologs (`nxHelBake1.g10196.t1` and `nxHelBake1.g10198.t1`) are also available. 


[**h11_region**](https://github.com/lstevens17/heligmosomoides_MS/tree/main/5_divergent_contents/h11_region)

Contains code and files associated with the H11-containing region shown in Figure S17. The nucmer alignments of each assembled haplotype to the nxHelBake1.1 reference genome (`*filtered.coords`) are plotted by the Rscript `plot_dotplots.R`. The FASTA file, alignment and gene tree of the H11 homologs in nxHelBake1, ngHelPoly1, and H. contortus  are available in files with the prefix `OG0000182_and_NCBI_h11.fa*`. The FASTA file, alignment and gene tree of the hyper-divergent nxHelBake1 protein and its homologs are available in file with the prefix (`nxHelBake1.g5347.t2*`).


[**nsp_region**](https://github.com/lstevens17/heligmosomoides_MS/tree/main/5_divergent_contents/nsp_region)

Contains code and files associated with the novel secreted protein-containing region shown in Figure S15. The nucmer alignments of each assembled haplotype to the nxHelBake1.1 reference genome (`*filtered.coords`) are plotted by the Rscript `plot_dotplots.R`. The FASTA file, alignment and gene tree of the hyper-divergent nxHelBake1 proteins and their homologs are available in file with the prefices (`nxHelBake1.g15562.t1*` and `nxHelBake1.g15563.t1*`).


[**shared_haplotype_divergence**](https://github.com/lstevens17/heligmosomoides_MS/tree/main/5_divergent_contents/shared_haplotype_divergence)

Contains code and files associated with the analysis of the divergence in shared haplotypes. `dS_by_group.tsv` contains the synonymous divergence (dS) value for each single-copy orthologue between nxHelBake1 and ngHelPoly1 and whether they are in shared haplotypes or in non-divergent haplotypes. These values are plotted as a boxplot by `plot_dS_boxplot.R`. 

[**tsp_finding**](https://github.com/lstevens17/heligmosomoides_MS/tree/main/5_divergent_contents/tsp_finding)

Contains code and files associated with finding putative trans-specific polymorphisms (TSPs) between H. bakeri and H. polygyrus. `all_gene_trees.txt` contains the gene trees for each hyper-divergent protein and its homologues generated by IQ-TREE. `find_tsp_candidates.py` parses the gene trees and identifies TSPs as those trees that contain clades containing both H. bakeri and H. polygyrus homologues that are supported by a given bootstrap threshold (50 was used in the analysis presented in the manuscript). It also notes if any of these clades contain both nxHelBake1.primary and ngHelPoly1.primary, which is then used in the shared haplotype divergence analysis.


[**ttr_region**](https://github.com/lstevens17/heligmosomoides_MS/tree/main/5_divergent_contents/ttr_region)

Contains code and files associated with the transthyretin-containg region shown in Figure S16. The nucmer alignments of each assembled haplotype to the nxHelBake1.1 reference genome (`*filtered.coords`) are plotted by the Rscript `plot_dotplots.R`. The FASTA file, alignment and gene tree of the hyper-divergent nxHelBake1 proteins and their homologs are available in file with the prefices (`nxHelBake1.g653.t1*`, `nxHelBake1.g654.t1*`, and `nxHelBake1.g655.t1*`).
